---
title: Proverbs 16
slug: proverbs-16
date: '2021-06-25 12:00:29'
category: Non-technical>Journal
tags: ['books', 'bible', 'wisdom']
draft: true
---

The first 9 verses seem to loosely be about plans and the motivations for
various actions. The wisdom and purpose of God's actions are contrasted with the
motivations of human plans.

The first proverb is a bit of a riddle. $^{1}$<mark>The plans of the heart
belong to man, but the answer of the tongue is from the Lord.</mark> I get the
first part, but why would a spoken answer generally be from God? Is it that even
if you are wise, and fear God, your plans are still your own but the way you
speak about them is different because you fear God?

$^{2}$<mark>All the ways of a man are pure in his own eyes, but the Lord weighs
the spirit.</mark> Don't be surprised that foolish, stupid or evil people think
that their actions and decisions are upstanding and good. Understand that God
says the spirit (motivation or attitude) that produced the plan or the actions
is what should be judged. I don't think that God would agree that "the ends
justifies the means".

$^{3}$<mark>Commit your work to the Lord and your plans will be
established.</mark> A good proverb for fridge magnets.

$^{4}$<mark>The Lord has made everything for its purpose, even the wicked for
the day of trouble.</mark> The mysteries around moral responsibility from
free will and predestination are not unique to the New Testament. I can't think
of anything useful to say in order to expand on this. I believe it's true, I
don't really know what I would do differently now that I've read this proverb. I
can trust God that he knows what he's doing and that he is _good_. I'll add it
to my list of things I know about God without taking anything else off the list.

$^{5}$<mark>Everyone who is arrogant[^1] in heart is an
abomination to the Lord, be assured he will not go unpunished.</mark> God really
doesn't like arrogance, which seems very similar to pride. This is troubling
because society seems to have lost any appreciation for humility to the point
where we no longer know how to talk about the virtues and vices of humility and
pride. Pride is considered a virtue and is conflated with self-worth. We lack
the nuance required to reliably discern wisdom from folly.

$^{6}$<mark>By steadfast love and faithfulness iniquity is atoned for, and by
the fear of the Lord one turns away from evil.</mark> It is refreshing and
pleasant to read about _Steadfast love and faithfulness_.

I don't hear many people talking about these virtues - love has been reduced or
redefined as something that can be found or changed quickly.

Faithfulness isn't celebrated or spoken about very much. Maybe because it isn't
as dramatic as betrayal. Faithfulness and steadfast love are predicated on
humility, which is another concept society seems silent about.

The second half of the proverb is also profound. It tells me how I can turn away
from evil. I know that it is easier to say I will change my ways than it is to
actually change, consistently.

"Being good" or "turning away from evil" is not nearly as easy or simple as a
child thinks it is, and this proverb tells me how to do it. The last proverb of
the previous chapter said that the fear of the lord is instruction in wisdom,
and that humility comes before honor.

$^{8}$<mark>Better is a little with righteousness than great revenues with
injustice.</mark> In case there was any doubt, here it is. Don't compromise
yourself in order to make more money.

$^{9}$<mark>The heart of a man plans his way, but the Lord
establishes[^2] his
steps.</mark> So I can make my own plans, but if my plans are to be successful,
or substantial, I need the Lord to make my plans "firm" or "permanent".

$^{10}$<mark>An oracle is on the lips of a king, his mouth does not sin in
judgement.</mark> I don't know what this means. An oracle is "a priest acting as
a medium through whom advice or prophecy was sought from the gods." Kings have
certainly sinned when making judgements.

$^{11}$<mark>A just balance and scales are the Lords, all the weights in the bag
are his work.</mark> God loves justice, and the instruments or justice are
ultimately his, and are from him.

$^{12}$<mark>It is an abomination to kings to do evil, for the throne is
established by righteousness.</mark> The kings in verses 12 and 10 are not like
kings I have heard about. If 12 is true then perhaps 10 can be true. At a
minimum, 12 and 13 provides some standard by which to judge kings.

$^{16}$<mark>How much better to get wisdom than gold! To get understanding is to
be chosen rather than silver.</mark> One of the many bits of advice that could
come from this would be to prioritise jobs with training and experience over jobs with
higher salaries immediately. Especially in your twenties or when you are
starting your career. You don't need lots of disposable income, you do need
wisdom, training, experience, perspective, time with wise or experienced people.

$^{17}$<mark>The highway of the upright turns aside from evil, whoever guards
his way preserves his life.</mark> _Guarding your way_ - this is not a concept
or expression I've heard of before. I guess it could mean "defend the path your
life could take", or "think about the consequences (second order consequences)."

$^{18}$<mark>Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a
fall.</mark> God really doesn't like pride, and also it leads to destruction.
This is not a coincidence. Haughty means "arrogantly superior or disdainful"
which is mostly a synonym for prideful.

$^{19}$<mark>It is better to be of a lowly spirit with the poor than to divide
the spoil with the proud.</mark> Avoid prideful people, avoid evil people.
Proverbs seems really clear that you are supposed to socialise and spend time
with people you want to be like. A lowly spirit is "low is status, or humble".
Better to hang out with poor people and be humble than to be rich and associate
with prideful people.

$^{20}$<mark>Whoever gives thought to a matter will discover good, and blessed
is he who trusts in the Lord.</mark> More encouragement to trust God, and to be
considerate.

21 and 23 both say that it is wise to speak persuasively or encouragingly. If
the words are well intended, then make them more effective by being
persuasive.

$^{21}$<mark>The wise of heart is called discerning, and sweetness of speech
increases persuasiveness.</mark>

$^{23}$<mark>The heart of the wise makes his speech judicious[^3] and adds
persuasiveness to his lips.</mark>

$^{24}$<mark>Gracious words are like a honeycomb, sweetness to the soul and
health to the body.</mark>Our words affect our bodies, and our souls. Gracious
words are really valuable. Gracious means to be kind, courteous, or patient. Let
it go, be gentle.

$^{25}$<mark>There is a way that seems right to a man, but its end is the way to
death.</mark> Don't be so confident in your own wisdom and judgement. It's not
just that your judgement is a bit less good than God's, this proverb says its
totally opposite. Expect to be doing things that look like the opposite of what
someone might expect. Expect to do unintuitive things.

$^{26}$<mark>A workers appetite works for him, his mouth urges him on.</mark>
True that.

$^{32}$<mark>Whoever is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he who
rules his spirit than he who takes a city.</mark> Wow. This is high praise for
self control.

![domino meme](/static/images/proverbs/domino-meme.jpg)

[^1]: Arrogant: Having or revealing an exaggerated sense of ones own importance or abilities.
[^2]: Establish: Set up on a firm or permanent basis.
[^3]: Judicious: Having, showing or done with good judgement or sense.
